All right. Uh thank you so much. Um this
is really fun. Uh I've not given a talk
specifically on this topic, but uh I
take it very seriously and I think about
it all the time. So let's let's try it
and see see how it goes. Um if you want
to follow up on uh any of the science
here, uh this this is my official lab
web page that has all the papers, the
data sets, the software, all that stuff.
And then this is my personal blog with
some kind of somewhat crazier version of
what what I think all of these things
mean and so on.
church. So, what I'd like to do uh today
is uh f first just give you a quick
outline of what I'm going to uh the kind
of the journey I'm going to take you on.
I'm going to try in the next 25 minutes
to uh take you through a few different
things. And you know, fundamental to
ethics is I think this question of what
should I do next? And I think
fundamental to that is the question of
what am I really? And how do I relate to
the outside world? And this is a lot of
what we do even though we have a a wet
lab a large wet lab where we do all
kinds of um work on on on cancer and and
bioengineering and so on. But I think I
think fundamentally this is this is the
sort of thing that that we actually work
on. So I'm going to um talk to you about
this idea that we are all a kind of
collective intelligence. In fact, I'm
going to try to show you and again hard
in in 25 minutes, but I I'll at least
show you some uh some a few examples why
I think really the world consists of
intelligence all the way down. Okay? Not
just brainy mammals and birds and things
like that, but but all all the way down.
Um the implications of that uh amazingly
enough are that we can reach all kinds
of interesting new biio medicine if we
understand how intelligence is
implemented in our bodies. And so um so
that gives all kinds of opportunities.
Um there are always in a discussion of
ethics. I'm sure somebody will be
interested in the risks. So I'm not
going to do a lot of on that in in the
in the main talk, but if you want to ask
me questions about it later, it's the
kind of the most common thing that comes
up. So I'd rather talk about some of the
some of the more unusual things. Um one
thing that I want to be very clear on uh
with respect to um evaluating risk in uh
in science is that we really have to
think about the opportunity cost. In
other words, lots of people approach
risk in scientific discovery with a kind
of an unspoken assumption that
everything is great now and you
scientists better not screw it up. In
other words, don't do anything that
makes the situation worse. That's a lot
of a lot of these discussions come from
that from that place. But actually, uh
you probably know things are absolutely
not great. There is incredible
biomedical suffering out there. I'm not
a clinician. I'm not an MD, but I get uh
emails, probably a dozen emails per day
from people in the most unbelievable uh
extremes of of of pain and infirmity and
disease and whatever. And so it's really
hard for young um healthy people to to
uh to realize what what we're actually
talking about here. And so and so I I
think yeah, we absolutely have to think
about the risks, but we also have to
think about um the ethical imperative to
do something to help this the situation.
And I actually think it is it is, you
know, a kind of moral cowardice to sort
of leave it alone and say, "Not my
problem. I'm just going to sit back and
try not to make things worse." I think
that's that's that's not the right way
to go. And also, of course, there's
issues with with the environment and and
so on. uh past the biomedical kinds of
things I'm going to talk about um this
notion of freedom of embodiment because
after we learn to fix all of the issues
of the body towards the normal standard
complement of form and function then
then you realize that you can use the
exact same tools to actually create any
kind of embodiment that you want and so
this is something of course that we can
think about in in any discussion of
ethics and then towards the end I'm
going to talk about just just the the
bigger uh picture of how that leads to a
huge variety of unconventional beings
with which we are going to share our
world uh and already share our world and
what we owe to these to these beings
that that and so and so that kind of
brings us brings us back full circle
right you can see this is kind of really
a cycle even though I've I've I've
listed it linearly so so the first the
first thing we need to think about is
what are all the beings that are
relevant to ethics and so when we see
something something like this so here's
a here's a kind of Oscar winning
performance here this little squirrel
knows exactly what's going on she's
going to put the thing on the neck Heck.
Ah, look. It's had a terrible accident.
It even uh it's even going to look to
see if uh if the if the you know if the
humans are um are watching to make sure
that see are you guys looking? Look, I'
I've had a terrible accident. And so so
when we see when we see something like
this, it's very obvious that that this
is something that has intelligence that
this is something that has preferences
that it has a theory of mind and and so
that we you know that that that uh we
have to be we have to be kind to things
like this. And it's obvious to us
because it functions on the same scale
of space and time. It operates in the
same uh space as we do in
threedimensional space. It has somewhat
similar goals um to us in terms of
survival and physiological integrity and
uh and and and so on. Uh so so this is
easy, but actually it gets much more
complicated because um and I'll just use
an example of the electromagnetic
spectrum. Back back in the day there
were uh phenomena such as lightning and
static electricity and magnets and light
and all kinds of things. And until we
had a proper theory of electromagnetism
we had no idea that all of these were
actually the same thing. Okay, we all we
thought they were disparate phenomena.
And and what a proper theory of of
electricity and electromagnetism did for
us is that it allowed us to say first of
all that actually all of these things
are manifestations of the same
underlying uh phenomenon. That
phenomenon is continuous. In other
words, it's a spectrum. It's not a set
of discrete things. Even though we like
to cut it up into regions just for for
convenience. It's actually a spectrum.
And most importantly, that we are
natively because of our evolutionary
history, we are only sensitive to a tiny
part of that spectrum. all of this
stuff. We had no idea that all of this
stuff existed until that theory enabled
uh technology that now wi with with the
the the the technological appliances and
the theory behind them enable us to
recognize and make use of all kinds of
uh other phenomena in in our universe
that to which we were completely blind.
So I'm going to make the claim that we
have we as as humans we have a
significant amount of mind blindness.
We're reasonably good at recognizing um
things like things like this. And so
lots of people study birds and and
primates and maybe a whale or an octopus
or things like this. But there are all
kinds of other creatures and um one of
the things that I try to do in my group
is to develop a framework that allows us
to think about diverse intelligences. So
all kinds of weird colonial organisms
and engineered new life forms that have
never existed before. I'm going to show
you uh some today. uh artificial
intelligence, whether purely software or
robotic, maybe someday um aliens and and
even really exotic things that don't
look like uh like beings at all, such as
patterns, actually active patterns
within media. And so, so that spectrum
instead of the electromagnetic spectrum,
what we have here is a is a spectrum of
agency. Okay? Okay. And we could talk
about this for for the for the longest
time, but but fundamentally what we have
is some kind of a a a gradual uh uh
continuum where passive matter, if there
even is such a thing, uh slowly uh
scales up its cognitive capacities to
eventually become uh something like a
metacognitive human or whatever whatever
is beyond that. And so so this is what
we work on. If you're interested, this
this paper um has all has a lot of the
details. And I think this is not just a
philosophical task because as as as we
have shown if you if you do this well it
leads to new biomedical and
bioengineering advances. So it actually
drives new science and I think really
really critical it's it's actually going
to lead to better ethics. So another way
to think about this is that if you know
the history of of numbers, you know,
first we had some counting numbers and
then somebody invented zero and then we
had some negative numbers and then we
had the rationals and then somebody
realized that that wasn't enough and
then you know we needed the irrationals
and and so on. And uh each of these each
of these um expansions of what we
understand as number broke uh prior
um concepts as far as what defines the
set of numbers. it uh it it it required
a conceptual leap to get there and to
expand our understanding and uh it was
uh actually quite stressful for
everybody. I mean people people died
over this uh you know discovery that the
rational numbers weren't all there is.
You know a lot some people were killed,
people committed suicide. It was it was
really fundamental and I think um what
we have here and I'm not going to get
through uh I may not even get to get to
touch this but but I'm going to go go
through trying to gradually enlarge the
set of things that I think are on the
spectrum with us as being cognitive
beings that are that are relevant to
questions of of ethics. And the first
thing is that you know in standard uh
philosophy of mind or just philosophy
textbooks in general what you'll see is
they talk about the human humans do this
and they do that and they have for the
ability to imagine things and and and
have moral worth and whatever. And so
they have this they have this um
beautiful agential glow about them that
that makes them important as moral
actors. Um but we know that that we
stand at the center of this continuum
both on an evolutionary and
developmental time scale where we
started life as a single cell and
whatever was the origin before that. And
so this too is a set of slow changes.
And whatever you think, whatever um
philosophical properties this this human
has, you have to have some story of what
happened in the previous stages like how
did we get here and what and and you
know is it is it gradual? Is it um is it
discreet? You know what's going on? And
as I'm going to point out in a minute,
this is not enough. There's another
spectrum that we are at the center of
which is the set of biological and
technological changes that again slowly
and gradually could move us beyond what
what this is and then again you have to
ask yourself you know where where does
this agential glow um peter out and then
you don't have to worry about these
things anymore or does it ever and and
things like that. So here's here's how
we we all enter the world. We start life
as a little blob of chemistry and
physics. It's a little unfertilized
oasite. Um then then there's this this
incredibly magical process called
embryogenesis where uh slowly and
gradually the without there there's
never a magic lightning flash that takes
you from physics to to the land of
psychology. But what happens is
eventually you become one of these
beings that are susceptible to uh the
tools of behavioral science or maybe
even psychoanalysis, you know, and
something like this. And so um the story
of of of our origin is really the story
of scaling up of cognition um and and
transformation. It's a it's a it's
really we you know as as scientists and
philosophers we need to we need to
understand uh the this this
transformative process of of how mind uh
emerges from these simpler um
components. And in fact uh if you look
at an early embryionic blasto blastoerm
there might be you know a couple of
hundred thousand cells at some
particular stage and you look at that
and you say well there's one embryo
there's an embryo and when you say it's
an embryo what are you counting what is
there one of I mean there's hundreds of
thousands or millions of cells what what
what is there one of well it turns out
that the the the the best thing you
could say is that what there is one of
is commitment to a particular story. In
other words, alignment towards a
specific journey in anatomical space.
And then anatomical space being just the
config the space of all possible
configurations that a body might take
that and and that all of these cells
agree. They all share the same they
they've bought into the same model of
where they're going to go in anatomical
space and then they make this one
embryo. That's what you're counting.
You're counting commitment to a model.
And if you make little little scratches
in this in this blaster, then each one
of these islands is going to do the same
uh because it's unaware of the presence
of the others. Eventually it might heal
up or it might not. But basically then
you get twins and triplets and and and
so on. And so what you see here is the
question of how many individuals are
inside this excitable medium is not
known in advance. It's not set by the
genetics. It could be anywhere from zero
to probably half a dozen or more. Um and
uh and and each and and there are
potentially multiple different uh
cognitive beings that come out of this
because of this process of uh
differentiation. Where do I end and the
outside world begins? Right? That's
that's what's happening here. And that
of course has has lots of parallels to
uh issues of individuation and uh
dissociation in the cognitive sphere. So
split brain patients whose left and
right hemispheres don't communicate very
well. Uh dissociative identity disorders
where you have multiple personalities on
the same brain hardware and so on. So
you're already starting to see that that
it's it's it's not at all as simple our
our origin and um are uh the the
underlying mechanisms are not you know
uh what what is commonly portrayed in in
in philosophical discussions of of of
humans and our ethical duties and so on.
This is this is the sort of thing we're
made from. Uh now this happens to be a
free-living one called the lacrimia but
this is a single cell. Okay. And it has
no brain, no nervous system. uh very
competent in all of its local um local
little goals. This is what we're made
of. Um you can already see that it has
uh it has some some ability to manage
its business at this at this lower
scale. In fact, even below that level,
the molecular networks inside of that
little creature. In fact, inside of all
of us are molecular networks that are
capable of six different kinds of
learning. Okay? So, different kinds of
memory, including Pavlovian
conditioning. So the material that
you're made of all the way down to the
molecular level uh has and and and and
probably below that we could talk about
that. Um has has certain behavioral
properties that you that you would
easily recognize as uh as aspects of
cognition and we're taking advantage of
that for all kinds of biomedical
purposes in our lab to try to uh try to
train these electrical these um
biochemical networks for drug
conditioning and things like that. And
so life exerts intelligence in lots of
spaces, not just the three-dimensional
space where it's easy for us to
recognize, you know, things like these
crows that have learned to exchange
cigarette butts for uh for for treats. U
but but it it operates in many spaces.
It operates in the space of gene
expression. It operates this in the
space of physiological states and it
operates in uh in the in anatomical
morph space which is the again the space
of uh shape configurations. Um and this
is the one we'll we'll talk about today.
And um and when I say life operates in
these spaces, I mean that it navigates
those spaces adaptively to solve
problems just like conventional animals
that you're used to navigate a
threedimensional space to solve
problems. I'll give you just one one
simple example of u of how what what I
mean by by that by that. This is a
cross-section through a kidney uh tubule
um in a noot and you can see it's got a
it's got a lumen in the middle and then
you got these eight to 10 cells that
work together. If you uh make multiple
if you make kid um nude embryos with
multiple copies of their genome the
cells will get bigger to accommodate the
additional genetic material uh oddly the
n stays the same size. And you say well
how how could that be? And that's
because while the cells are bigger, what
they do is they adjust and fewer of them
are now making the exact same structure
until you make a N with so many copies
of their genome that the cells become
gigantic and instead of many cells
working together to build this one
single cell will bend around itself and
leave a hole in the middle. Okay, this
is a different mech the different
molecular mechanisms. So what you have
here are a bunch of cells that are using
different affordances, different
genetically specified affordances,
meaning different mechanisms that they
have to get the job done in the face of
incredibly weird circumstances. If
you're a n coming into this world, you
can't count on the outer environment. Of
course, things will change, but you
can't even count on your own parts. You
don't even know how many copies of your
genetic material you're going to have.
You don't know what the size of your
cells are going to be. You don't know
what the number of your cells are going
to be. have to get you have to reach
that region of anatomical morphospace
with uh new v you know various new
tricks using the tools you have despite
all of the all all these novelties that
that is a standard version of
intelligence that is how they measure IQ
tests is they'll say you've got these
parts now creatively use them to solve
this problem you've never seen before
okay this is a system that does that but
not in 3D space it does it in anatomical
space uh and it it it and it means the
fact that the fact that the living
material is is uh has this uh um kind of
beginner's mind aspect to it where it
does not assume in fact at least most
organisms do not assume that everything
is going to go the way that it used to
go for its ancestors. They have they
have this ability to creatively uh use
their their genome and its products to
solve problems. That means that not only
can they do things like this, they can
also do things like this. Here's a
tadpole. So here's the mouth, the
nostrils, the brain, the spinal cord.
Here what we've done is uh prevent the
primary eyes from forming. But we did
put an eye on its tail and we found that
these animals can see quite well. How do
we know? We built a device that um
trains them in visual um behavioral
tasks and and they can see. Now this is
kind of shocking. Why why don't these
animals where the eye does not connect
to the brain? So here the eye makes an
optic nerve. That optic nerve might
synapse onto the spinal cord. It might
go to the gut. It might go nowhere at
all. Why does this work out of the box?
How come you don't need rounds of
evolutionary uh mutation, selection,
adaptation, all that stuff to
accommodate this completely novel
sensory motor architecture. Why does
this work out of the box? And so uh that
and it's because of that plasticity that
I told you a minute ago because
evolution does not make fixed solutions
to fixed environments. It makes
problemsolving agents that you know
these cells never assumed the tadpole
was going to be uh the same all the time
anyway. it's going to they figure out a
way to to to make it work. And one way
they do that, and so you understand, I'm
using I'm using uh this this this
example of cells navigating anatomical
space as a case study or a um a model of
an unconventional intelligence. We we
don't have any aliens, but we do have uh
intelligences that live in very
different problem spaces, and we can use
that as a as a way to start
understanding how do we communicate, how
do we detect intelligence? And so I
showed you some ways of doing that. you
sort of make perturbations and you
notice they can get to the same goal by
different means. So that's William
James' definition of intelligence. Okay,
so we've detected them. What's the next
step? Well, how do we communicate with
them if we're going to have a
relationship with with these um
intelligences? How how do we communicate
them with them? Well, we discovered uh
that that a very important kind of
communication with them can take place
through the bioelectric interface. um
just like you and I are now
communicating through the bioelect
electrical interface of your nervous
system, okay, of your retina and your
and your auditory stream and and um and
your nervous system. Turns out uh this
is this is also a very good way to
communicate with the cellular
intelligence of your body. So what we've
developed are tools that let us see the
electrical signals uh moving between all
of the uh components of this collective
intelligence. So this is just like
neuroscientists do in the brain except
we can now do this anywhere in the body.
So the colors indicate voltage levels.
Here's a bunch of cells in the dish.
This is an early frog embryo. Uh and now
what we can do is we can read the mind
of the body by by uh reading these
electrical signals. We can try to
interpret them and then uh try to
understand what what is it that what
what are the memories the you know the
preferences the goals and and so on of
this new collective intelligence. Uh we
now have a way to also write
information. We don't use electric
fields or waves or frequencies or
anything like that. We manipulate the
interface that the cells are normally
using to control each other. So that
means ion channels and electrical
synapses known as gap junction just like
in neuroscience. So this is the
communication interface that we hack. If
you do this, you can do some interesting
things. First of all, you can shift the
border of the self of of an agent. So
just to explain what I mean, this this
single cell that that I shown you before
has a very has very tiny goals. All of
its goals are in terms of space-time um
uh kind of a radius. The cognitive light
cone is very small both in space and
time. But when they get together, uh
these cells can pursue really grandiose
goals. So here's the uh um the limb of a
of a of a salamander. If you amputate
that limb anywhere here, the cells will
rapidly build and then they stop when
it's done. So So their goal, the goal of
the collective is to build this thing.
And you know it's a goal because if you
deviate them from that goal, they will
work really hard. They will achieve it
and then they will stop. So no
individual cell knows what a finger is
or how many fingers you're supposed to
have. But the collective absolutely
does. As you can see here, it's very
reliable. So the scale of the goals,
right, the border between self and world
has has has grown huge. The self is
gigantic here. The self is very tiny
here. But that process can break down.
So here's human glyobblastoma cells. Now
these are cancer cells that have
basically uh disconnected electrically
from the collective. And at that point
they're back to their unicellular
lifestyle. They just can't remember the
large scale goal of building a nice nice
brain or anything else. And so so once
you understand that you can actually uh
control that electrical uh connection
between cells and force a larger
cognitive light cone onto these onto the
system. So here's a a human anka gene
injected into this tadpole. Uh it will
make a tumor. The tumor has this really
weird electrical uh state where you can
see the cells are actually disconnecting
from their neighbors. But if you prevent
them from doing that, even though that
anka protein is blazingly expressed,
it's the same animal. So it's tons of
that nasty anka gene, there's no tumor
because because what you've done is is
kept the cells connected to the
neighbor. So they're part of this
mindmeld of building nice skin, nice
muscle, and so on. So the cancer cells
aren't more selfish. They have smaller
selves. Yeah. The border between self
and world um has has shrunken. We've
reinflated again. So that's one thing
you can do uh through this interface is
you can sort of play with the with the
border between self and world. Um of
course we can communicate certain goals
now that we understand a little bit
about um how they think. We can
communicate certain goals. Here's one
thing we can do is to tell a frog. Frogs
don't regenerate their legs unlike that
salamander that I showed you. We can we
can tell tell these cells here to go
down the leg building path instead of
the scarring path. And so by 45 days
then you already have some toe some
toes. you've got a toenail and
eventually a very respectable looking
functional leg. And we did that by
providing specific um ion channel drugs
at this interface to put the cells in an
electrical state where they remember
that they need to build a limb as
opposed to scarring and stopping. We are
um currently doing this uh and so I have
to do a disclosure because this is a
this is a company that was spun out of
our lab uh with David Kaplan to uh to do
this in mammals and hopefully someday
humans. So this is one of those
biomedical applications. So that that
first application I just showed you was
about cancer. So the idea was to
normalize the cells, reconnect them to
the body. Don't not kill them with toxic
chemotherapy, not try to fix the
genetics, but to normalize them by
reconnecting them to the to the memories
of the body. This is now a second
application and around limb and organ
regeneration. So using electrical cues
to tell cells to rebuild the things they
already know how to rebuild. Um it it's
it's not just about uh rebuilding the
exact thing in the right place. You can
also do interesting things like this. Um
we can tell uh we can tell a bunch of
cells that would have been gut. We can
say no instead you should make an eye.
And the way we do that is we inject some
ion channel RNA that establishes a
bioelect electrical signal and that
tells the cells to build an eye and they
build an eye. And that eye has all the
same lens, retina, optic nerve, all the
stuff it's supposed to have. Um and it
has some some other um interesting
properties that I don't have time to to
talk about. But the idea is much like
when I'm talking to you now, I don't
need to worry about reaching into your
brain and changing all the all the
synaptic structures in your in your
brain to make sure you remember what
I've told you. You do that on your own.
I'm only providing a very kind of thin
stimulus and you do all the hard work of
managing the underlying biochemistry in
your brain to form memories, make
decisions and and and so on. Same thing
here. We are not we are not telling the
cells what to do. We are not um talking
to the genes or the stem cells. We
provide a very high level signal. Build
an eye. That's it. The system being a
being a good multiscale cognitive
system, it then takes that and does all
of the underlying biochemistry that's
needed to implement the message that um
that we've given them. So once once you
once you see all this, you realize that
that that what we eventually are going
to have is uh something that I call the
anatomical compiler. In other words,
once you understand how to tell groups
of cells what to build, then then you
get to move from from just from repair
to freedom of embodiment because then
you are going to be able to sit down and
draw any kind of a plant, animal, organ,
biobot, whatever. And the system should
be able to compile it into a set of
stimuli that would be given to cells to
get them to build exactly whatever you
want it to build. And so, yes, it will.
It will if we had that which which we
don't yet but but eventually we will and
if we have that you could all all of
this would go away right so so birth
defects traumatic injury cancer aging
degenerative disease all of that will
disappear once we know how to tell cells
exactly what to build it's a
communication problem it's not 3D
printing it's not uh gene editing it's a
it's a translator what you need is a
translator interface from our goal to
that of the the aential material of of
life but you realize now that that this
means that you don't just have to stick
to the standard human shape. If somebody
decides that, you know what, I'd like to
um have a couple of extra arms and maybe
an eye on the back of the head and maybe
it should be infrared sensitive and and
and whatever, all of that should be
completely possible. So much like we
augment ourselves now with toothbrushes
and antibiotics and uh education and uh
glasses and crutches and working out and
clothes and and all all of this kind of
stuff that we use now to go beyond our
um kind of uh quote unquote natural
state. In the future, you're going to be
able to do that even more so
biologically. And I think I think uh the
beings of the future, and I don't think
it's a very far future. I I think it's
it's not that far off are going to look
back and think it is completely
unimaginable that people in our day had
to had to live their whole life in the
body they were handed uh at birth. You
know, you were you're you're born the
details of your body of your
limitations, physical and mental
limitations are currently set by stray
cosmic rays that that hit the cells of
embryos, you know, going back how
however many however many eons ago. And
and people I I think people of the
future are going to be a gasast at this
at this notion that we just had to we
just had to live that way and there was
no no hope you know no no no opportunity
for for improvement. We just had to uh
uh you know deal deal with the
consequences of these of these stoastic
processes that don't really care about
our our goals or our um capabilities or
our values or any of that. So so the
final thing I want to show you in the
last couple of minutes uh is is this
um if you look at this little this
little creature. So now let's go even
beyond. So I've shown you um how to
communicate with the intelligence of the
body for repair. Then the idea that you
can use that to uh make radical changes
in the structure. You can make other
kinds of you know different different
kinds of embodiment. And now I want to
go go even further than that and and
really talk about um the plasticity and
the capabilities of the material of
life. What what else can it really do?
So if you look at something like this,
this looks like um some kind of
primitive creature I got off the bottom
of a pond somewhere.
It actually it turns out if you were to
sequence the genome it's 100% homo
sapiens. We call these anthrobots. These
are made of adult human cells. So human
patients donate tracheal epithelial
cells and we have a way of uh enabling
them to um self assemble. We we we
really don't do much. The cells do all
the all the hard work. They uh they self
assemble into this little motile
creature. This creature has four
different behaviors that it switches
between. So you can build a little ethog
of of its behaviors. it. If you look at
the gene expression here, this volcano
plot, they they express about 9,000
genes differently than the cells in the
body that they come from. In other
words, they about half the genome is
drastically remodeled. Uh but but we
haven't touched the DNA. We haven't done
anything to the genome. We haven't added
any weird nanomaterials. There are no
synthetic biology circuits. These are
completely wild type cells. And yet
they're capable of having a very
different embodiment. This looks nothing
like any stage of human development. and
uh and they and they pick and choose
what genes out of the out of the genome
they're going to express. They have some
wacky capabilities like um if you played
a bunch of human neurons here um these
anthrobots will will come and they'll
sit down in this uh superbot cluster and
they start repairing the gap. So they'll
sit there and they'll knit uh the
neurons together across this across this
wound. Now, who would have thought who
who knew that that the cells in your in
your airway are capable of becoming a
self-motile little creature that by the
way likes to heal neural wounds? Yeah,
we we would have never known that. So,
so the biomedical aspect here, so
there's two aspects of note here. The
biomedical aspect is that someday you
will have biobots made of your own cells
that can be injected into your body to
make repairs. You don't need immune
therapy because they're your own cells.
They won't be rejected. And can we learn
to program these things to enhance their
healing abilities so that uh they can
they can um uh have all kinds of useful
useful activities in the body. But the
other thing is the plasticity, the
incredible plasticity of life. There's
never been any anthropots. There's never
been any evolutionary selection to be a
good anthrobot. You know, where does
this come from? We can we can talk about
that too. But but what that means that
that incredible plasticity means that
almost uh any any level in biology can
be augmented or manipulated by by
engineering. And so when we talk about
ethics, a lot of people like to like to
sort of compare, you know, well, I'm a
real human and then there are these
machines and we're very different. Well,
the problem you're all going to be
facing in in in your lifetime, no, no
doubt about it, is is not what to do
with language models s sitting inside a
server somewhere. It's this this guy uh
has had various modifications and there
are a lot of people um who are going to
be interested in figuring out is is this
a quote unquote real human? Uh is it you
know what are we going to do? Is it
51% implants and now you're not a real
human? what is going to happen to uh to
to beings that are that are extended
rationally extended and modified in
other ways and uh that that opens up
that opens up numerous numerous
questions and and really um I think is
going to be very difficult uh and and
lead to a lot of moral lapses if we
insist on binary categories where you
know using using old school methods
we're going to try to figure out if this
is if this is a human or a machine. Um
I'm going to skip a couple things here
because uh we're running out of time.
Just to just to end on this uh this is
not about biology at all. I don't think
we have we have started looking at
extremely minimal systems. If any of you
um take programming you will no doubt
have heard of uh sorting algorithms
things like bubble sort and so on. All
computer science students study them.
They are very short simple deterministic
algorithms. And what we found is that
even those things when you look at them
the right way are doing things other in
in addition to what is actually in the
algorithm. In other words, the algorithm
makes them sort numbers and and they do
and they sort the numbers but also they
do other stuff uh they have these other
side quests is the best way I can
describe it that are nowhere in the
algorithm. And so they have a simple
version of what we have. In other words,
you have to obey physics, but uh within
the context of that in your life, you do
all kinds of things that are not
actually prescribed by the physics at
all. And it doesn't take life and it
doesn't take complexity and it doesn't
take a brain to be able to do that. I
think it's baked in all the way down.
And that means um that all of natural
life in is is a tiny little little speck
in this enormous space of possible
bodies and minds. you know, pretty much
any combination of evolved material,
engineered material, software, and
something I haven't had a chance to talk
about, but basically basically um uh
patterns uh that that are not in the
physical world at all, uh is is some
kind of being with some kind of embodied
intelligence that we are going to have
to learn to live with. And part of the
ethics of the future is developing a
kind of uh synth biosis, a synthetic um
uh a mutually beneficial interaction
with beings that are not like us at all.
So um I'm just going to uh thank the uh
the the postocs and the students who did
some of the work that I showed you today
and uh again some disclosures. There's
three companies that have spun out of
all this stuff and um our funders and
most of all um the systems that uh that
that that we learn from they do all the
heavy lifting. So I will stop here. I'll
thank you and take questions.